### Act 1: The Whispering Cairn
This adventure assumes that the PCs begin their adventuring careers in the lively mining town of Diamond Lake, a muddy smidge on the map of the hills east of the Fabulous Free City. Diamond Lake's inhabitants are predominately miners and laborers, serious folk who spend most of their lives toiling below ground. When not working, the miners celebrate along the Vein, a seedy road lined with alehouses and brothels. Overall, the village is a sooty, sullen place prone to unpleasant bursts of violence and passion. But Diamond Lake holds plenty of opportunities for adventure, for the uplands surrounding the town are rife with the ancient tombs and burial cairns of long-dead cultures.

Idle chatter around the village speaks of a trio of richly dressed adventures who frequent the taproom of the Feral Dog, Diamond Lake's most notorious tavern. The confident heroes of the Free City spoke of the hard-won battles on their journey to Diamond Lake, and their intention to explore the long-abandoned Stirgenest Cairn on the lake's distant southeastern shore. The PCs, being natives of Diamond Lake, know that cairn is oft explored by the community's youth, who always find it completely empty of marvels and perfectly harmless.

Not so another cairn within a day's ride of the village. This cairn lies near an iron mine that went dry about 50 years ago. The mine's charter lapsed when its manager died a few years later. Situated in a sort of no-man's land, the cairn was all but forgotten, it's yawning entrance overgrown with weeds and choked with debris. Rediscovered by a curious teenager a decade ago, the cairn has since been a sort of community secret held by Diamond Lake's youth, who dare each other to disappear into its cyclopean entrance to prove their bravery. Occasionally, when the wind is just right, haunting, almost magical tones emerge from the depths of the forlorn tomb. Those who know of its location call it the Whispering Cairn.

If adventurers from the Free City expect to discover hidden passages and riches within the Stirgenest Cairn, it stands to reason that the Whispering Cairn might also hold a genuine opportunity for profit. In the rough-and-tumble mining village of Diamond Lake, where desperate folk slave in dank tunnels to profit wealthy masters, an opportunity for profit is an opportunity to escape.

### History of the Whispering Cairn

Many thousands of years ago, long before the rise of human civilization, two ancient powers struggled to determine the fate of the still-forming multiverse. On one side was a primal being called the Queen of Chaos, a tentacled horror from an age before ages. Against her stood the rigid legions of the Wind Dukes of Aaqa, the most cultured of the elemental lords who ruled before the birth of the living races, and hwo yet controlled an empire that spanned worlds. Centuries of stalemate collapsed when the Queen of Chaos recruited her most potent ally, a ruthless Prince of Demons named Miska the Wolf-Spider.

Miska and his demonic legions laid siege to the Wind Dukes' territory, routing the elemental armies and snuffing out the culture of Aaqa one world at a time. When all seemed lost, a consortium of seven great Wind Duke warriors withdrew from the conflict and developed a plan to destroy Miska the Wolf-Spider and break the back of the Chaos army. An epic quest ensued, in which these "Wandering Dukes" scoured the Great Wheel for a weapon or secret that would undo their hated foe. Drawing upon the lore of a hundred cultures, they constructed one of the most potent artifacts in history - the fabled ***Rod of Law***.

They returned to the war at a pivotal battle on the volcanic fields of Pesh. There, the greatest of the Wandering Dukes plunged the Rod into Miska the Wolf-Spider. When the absolute law of the Rod mixed with the chaos of Miska's blood, a great planar rift erupted, shattering the Rod into seven pieces. The Prince of Demons and the Wandering Duke vanished into that right, while the seven parts of the Rod were scattered across the land.

Hundreds of Wind Dukes remained at Pesh, many dead or dying from wounds sustained in the tumultuous final battle. By ancient tradition, these soldiers would be buried on the world where they died, their elaborate tombs forever recalling the brave sacrifice of the heroes of Aaqa and serving as testament to the reach of their moribund (a thing on the brink of death or declining into oblivion) empire. The Wind Dukes ranged south from Pesh, across an immense lake to a craggy region perfect for the task. Thus, were the first tombs built in the hills surrounding Diamond Lake.

The greatest of these tombs honored Icosiol, a Wandering Dike slain by Miska the Wolf-Spider in the final cataclysmic conflict between Law and Chaos. Others contained Icosiol's fallen servants and sub-chiefs, each with its own treasures and stories to tell. One of these smaller tombs held the corpse of Zosiel, a warrior prince who fell to a demon's blow shortly before the Wandering Dukes employed the Rod of Law to banish Miska form the world. This is the Whispering Cairn.

In the millennia since its construction, the Whispering Cairn hosted countless visitors. They first made off with the most attainable of the tomb's treasures, statuettes of peerless sculpt, platinum canisters of priceless incense, and a hundred harder to describe baubles of unquestionable valued. No few explorers fell victim to the ingenious traps of the tomb's chief architect, a noble Wind Duke named Nadroc. only a few explorers discovered that most of the cairn was but a ruse meant to distract from a still greater tomb filled with even deadlier menaces. Even thousands of years after its construction, the Whispering Cairn yet holds unplundered mysteries form the days of its creation.

The last notable expedition to the Whispering Cairn occurred nearly 60 years ago, led by an unscrupulous archeologist called Ulavant. The reprobate scholar had the backing of the Seekers, an order of like-minded academics and adventurers. The affair ended in tragedy, with all hands lost to Nadroc's insidious traps.  These days, only footnotes in musty tomes in the Seeker Lodge of the Free City record the fate of Ulavant's band.

About 30 years ago, a young runaway named Alastor Land came to the Whispering Cairn, desperate to escape his uncaring family. Light enough to prance over pressure plates and lucky enough to avoid the tomb's sentient guardians, Alastor penetrated farther into the cairn than most skilled explorers. But even the luck of youth was no match for Nadroc's keen intellect and cunning protections. Comsumed by hate at the time of his death, Alastor lives on as a ghost, and still haunts the most secret chambers of the Whispering Cairn.

These days, the youth of Diamond Lake hold the location of the Whispering Cairn like a shibboleth. They dare each other to spend a night within its depths, using the place as a test of mettle. These visits tapered off about six years ago, when a local girl vanished while sleeping in the cairn, devoured by a snake that has since left for more fertile hunting grounds. But still the children come, to marvel at the tomb's uncanny sounds and to carve their names upon the entry walls, their shaking hands etching proof of their courage upon the ancient stone.

Now others come to the Whispering Cairn for reasons of their own, brave strangers who will risk death in search of ancient wealth. But the greatest treasure they will take form this place is each other.

### Adventure Synopsis

The bulk of this adventure involves the exploration of the Whispering Cairn, a sizable dungeon complex loaded with ancient traps and a collection of interesting (and territorial) inhabitants. Deep within the comples, the PCs come across the ghost of Alastor Land, the runaway child who fell victim to one of the cairn's traps 30 years ago. The undead horror blocks the PCs' progress, promising to abandon the cairn if the characters return his bones to the small family cemetery on a farmstead just outside of town.

This farmstead is now an overgrown ruin inhabited by a nasty owlbear. The part's plans to return Alastor's bones are upset when they discover that the other graves in the family plot have been emptied. To appease the ghost, the party must track down Alastor's relatives, now used as guardian skeletons by an unusual necromancer who has recently arrived in town. Correspondence discovered at the necromancer's home reveals that the villains are preparing for a coming event known as the Age of Worms. The letter also refers to a secret cult hidden in a nearby mine, and implicates one of Diamond Lake's mine managers in cult-related activity.

The PCs return to the Whispering Cairn, where they explore the ruins beyond the blocked door to discover an unplundered tomb protected by hostile creatures of elemental air. At last, the PCs reach the tomb of the Wind Duke Zosiel and discover a treasure that may prove decisive in thwarting the advent of the Age of Worms. The secrets behind the strange cache are revealed in the next chapter of this adventure path.

### Prelude

The "Backdrop: Diamond Lake" article in Dungeon Magazine #124 provides several suggestions to help you get the PCs involved in the action, but there's still one critical element that has yet to be discussed: the campaign' opening scene.

The trio of Free City adventurers in town have spoken openly of their intent to raid the empty Stirgenest Cairn for at least a week, giving plenty of opportunity for word of their exploits to spread to all corners of Diamond Lake. Consider making one or two of the PCs the instigators for the plot. If you choose the PCs with the strongest need to get out of Diamond Lake, you'll find that the players help you move things along quite nicely. Characters who work for Diamond Lake's notorious Emporium make the best investigators, as they're the most likely to hear gossip and the most likely to want to leave the town as soon as possible, thanks to the squalid conditions of their workplace.

Before play begins, consider how each character comes across information about the Whispering Cairn. At the request of the plot's instigator, PCs whose backgrounds tie them to the Diamond Lake garrison might raid the office of the garrison's chief cartographer, making off with a 70-year-old map of the now-abandoned mine plot that clearly marks the cairn's entrance, complete with the words "Whispering Cairn" written nearby. More recent maps lack this crucial point of interest.

Since the trip from the village to the cairn requires some overland travel through the hills, a smart character might recruit a ranger, druid, or barbarian from the Bronzewood Lodge just outside of town. Few indeed are the wizards and sorcerers who wouldn't salivate at the thought of discovering lost arcane lore, so working in arcane spellcasters shouldn't be too much of a problem.

If the plot instigators each invite one PC, that brings the group to the standard size of four adventurers. In the likely event that you must account for more than four players, consider having the plot instigators each invite one character, who might himself invite another character unknown to the instigators. This infuses a current of uncertainty into the opening encounter, giving the players a hook upon which to begin roleplaying and introducing themselves to one another.

Before you begin the campaign, work with your players to get a sense of who their characters will be. Ask them what they're doing in Diamond Lake, and why their characters might be interested in getting out of town. It shouldn't be difficult to come up with such a reason - as the Diamond Lake backdrop and future chapters will make clear, Diamond Lake isn't exactly home sweet home.

Once you have gotten this information from your players, provide each of them with a printed background that weaves their ideas into your vision of Diamond Lake. End the notes with a suggestion that a friend or acquaintance has set up a meeting in an abandoned mine overseer's office about an hour outside town. Then, when play begins, introduce the players by one by one to the office and let the PCs get to know each other before they sot off for a life of adventure.

This office provides an excellent "home base" for the PCs to use during their exploration of the cairn. Anything valuable has been removed decades ago, but the crumbling, abandoned place still provides a stable roof (despite a collapsed second floor) that can protect the PCs from the ravages of nature.

An article on this office appears in Dragon #333. It's geared toward players, and gives them a map of the place and some suggestions for making it their hideout. While it's not necessary to run this adventure, you may find it helpful to hunt down a copy.