
```
Natural light dimply illuminates a long hallway extending north into darkness. A fait breeze brings with it sibilant whispers that sound almost like sighing breath. It must be a trick of the wind, but the effect is almost lifelike.

The walls bear horizontal bands of deceptively simple geometric patterns at waist level. In places the bands reveal startling detail, but in others the walls look as though they have been hacked apart with weapons or eroded by the rigors of time. Flakes of ancient paint, brilliant purple and a dull mustard hue, still cling to the walls in places, hinting at what must once have been a riot of color. A thin coat of dust coats the floor.

Just inside the darkened tomb, the hallway branches into shallow alcoves to the east and west. Here the walls bear the most significant damage. Dozens of clumsy etchings mar the beautiful ancient masonry like graffiti on a city wall. A clump of soiled cloth about the size of a halfling rests in the rounded terminus of the western alcove.

Outside, the wind picks up and a chorus of almost human sounds rises from the darkened hall.
```

In ancient days, these alcoves held great incense braziers mounted upon marble columns. Looters plundered these priceless artifacts centuries ago, leaving only four small anchoring holes along the periphery of a circular depression an inch deep and two feet wide.

A fine layer of dust coats the hall's first 60 feet. A character can make a **Survival 15** check to notice that several wolves have crossed the dusty hallway numerous times in the recent past.

The western alcove contains a moldy old bedroll used by a local teenager daring to spend an evening in the cairn. Any PC native to Diamond Lake under the age of 20 can make a **DC 16 Wisdom** check to remember childhood stories about a teenage girl who went missing 6 years ago. Add a +1 bonus to the check for every year that the character is younger than 20. Add a -1 modifier for each year past 25.

The bedroll has hardened and become brittle with age, and cracks if examined too roughly. It contains nothing of value. **A DC 16 Search** check turns up whittling shavings around the bedroll. 

A **DC 13 Investigation** check by any character examining the patterned bands upon the walls reveals thin, hollow tubes hidden within the patternwork. The strange whispers filling the hall seem to emit from these holes. The tubes extend to the surface of the mound above the cairn, where hundreds of tiny holes catch the wind and project it into the tomb. The outdoor holes are well hidden (and many of them have been covered over and filled with debris), requiring a **DC 19 Search** check to discover them.

The patterned bands bisect the walls all the way to area 4, where more intricate frescoes replace them.

Every three rounds, allow the PCs a **DC 13 Perception** check to notice a faint flickering green light coming from the north. This DC decreases by 5 halfway down the passage, and the light becomes obvious by the time the PCs reach area 4. The light comes from a guttering everburning torch in ==Area 7==.