
```
A dull gray stone pillar reaches from floor to ceiling in this large chamber. Halls extend to the east and west.
```

The west wall of the room's gray central pillar holds a deep recession that ends at what looks like a fountain basin about 4 feet off the ground. This is the nutrient still, a magical apparatus capable of churning forth a nutritive orange sludge that looks a bit like vomit and tastes a bit like gravy. One serving is sufficient to sustain a character for a full day. 15 servings can be harvested from the basin when it is full (as it is now). Servings are replaced at a rate of one per day.

The area around the nutrient still is infested with brown mold. Living creatures within 5 feet of the brown mold take 3d6 points of subdual cold damage. Fire brought within 5 feet of brown mold causes it to instantly double in size. Cold damage such as from a *ray of frost*, instantly destroys it. The extent of the mold infestation is displayed on the map.

The central pillar's east face bears a similar niche that extends from floor to ceiling. In ancient times, Nadroc hung his architect's tools on pegs in this alcove. An unfortunate tomb robber later attempted to steal these tools, bringing a massive stone column down on his head. A **DC 15 Search** check along the short wall north of the column reveals a hidden catch. Triggering the catch housts the column back into the ceiling, revealing a crushed human skeleton wearing shiny silver chainmail. Several of Nadroc's tools were detroyed when the stone column fell but others remain unharmed on their pegs where the architect left them thousands of years ago. Once the column has returned to the ceiling, the trap is forever useless, as the trigger was destroyed when the column fell.

A dry fountain along the south face of the central pillar features a low basin and a wall spigot about 8 feet hight, looking somethin like a shower. The enslaved water elemental that once powered this apparatus died centuries ago.

**Treasure**: The corpse in the tool closet wears a suit of +1 chainmail, but almost all of his other possessions were crushed along with his bones. In a leather sack so old that it crumbles to the touch can be found the remains of 3 broken statuettes of Nadroc's previous commissions (looted from Area 10) and 3 that remain in excellent condition -a grand palace, a slim spire with eight connected smaller towers of different heights, and what looks like a grand stadium. Each intact statuette is worth 200gp. The intact tools are a *Wand of Unseen Servant, a Staff of Defense, and Eyes of Minute Seeing*.