
```
The ceiling of this large chamber glows with what looks like natural sunlight, illuminating a series of worktables, vises, spinning wheels, and blocks of unfinished marble that identify the room as a sculptor's workshop. A huge unfinished statue of an imposing bare-chested warrior wielding a staff-like rod in its left hand dominates the north wall. The hairless figure looks similar to the bas-relief on the sarcophagus upstairs, but is clearly meant to be a different person. A short red metal pedestal against the south wall displays what appears to be a jet-black stone egg the size of a small boulder. A gold glyph - an equilateral triangle with short has marks through each leg - marks the face of the egg.
```

The statue is meant to represent the great Wind Duke who used the *Rod of Law* to defeat Miska the Wolf-Spider. The "rod" in the statue's hand is a petrified wood staff that Nadroc planned to replace later with a more ornate decoration. Anyone examining the staff notices that 6 grooves have been cut along its shaft, suggesting 7 segments.

The workshop has been competently looted, and all that remains are bits of furniture and parts of more elaborate sculpting tools. The *daylight* coming from the ceiling is a permanent magical effect.

A successful **DC 15 History or Arcana** check identifies the gold symbol upon the ebon egg as the person device of Ogrémoch, a legendary elemental prince of evil. A **DC 18** on the same check notes that Ogrémoch and a legion of lesser earth elementals were said to have served of the side of the Queen of Chaos at the great final battle at Pesh that ended a primordial war between Law and Chaos.

**Creature**: The egg is the dormant form of a hibernating Small Earth Elemental who served at Ogrémoch's side at the battle of Pesh and who was later captured by the victorious Wind Dukes of Aaqa and force into a life of magical servitude. The elemental, an evil lout called Artophanx, is forever bound to this chamber, compelled by ancient incantations to assist the Wind Duke Nadroc, who constantly grilled him about the properties of indigenous rock or the likely efficacy of this or that masonic flourish. The Lair of the Architect has been empty for thousands of years, so Artophanx went into hibernation centuries ago, and snaps out of his torpor only if touched. If this happens, the elemental immediately takes on an anthropomorphic form and barks a challenge in Terran, the grating gravelly language of elemental earth. If the PCs do not respond, Artophanx attacks.

Artophanx wants more than anything else to escape, and might be fooled into cooperating with the party if successfully bluffed by a Terran-speaking character. If convinced that the PCs might be able to help him escape the room (something well beyond their power) he can relate some useful facts about the Whispering Cairn's construction, including the fact that it was built by a Wind Duke named Nadroc to honor a warrior named Zosiel who died on the fields of Pesh and the fact that Zosiel's true tomb lies beyond the face in Area 8.

**Treasure**: The red metal pedestal is of a material totally unknown elsewhere on this world, and is worth 300 gp. It weighs 200 lbs. The wooden pole held by the statue doubles as a masterwork quarterstaff.

```statblock
name: Small Earth Elemental
hp: 11 (2d8+2)
ac: 16
type: Extraplanar
subtype: Elemental
alignment: TN
stats: [17,8,13,4,11,11]
senses: Darkvision 60 ft.
skillsaves:
  - Perception: +3
actions:
  - name: Slam
    desc: Melee Attack, +5 to hit, 1d6+4 (B)
saves:
  - Constitution: +4
  - Dexterity: -1
  - Wisdom: +0
size: Small
speed: 20 ft.
languages: Terran
```