In ancient days, the laborers cleaned themselves and disposed of their waste in the lower level of their lair (Areas 19-22). An enslaved water elemental commanded an elaborate set of showers and saw to the sanitary needs of the workers. Centuries of isolation have driven this creature insane, and now the lower chambers are completely submerged in water. Numerous drains near the shower pillars are wholly clogged with debris deposited by the elemental, leaving no way for the PCs to drain the area. The PCs first encounter the water about halfway down the stairs leading to Area 19.

All of the rooms are completely dark, which should add an eerie element to their exploration. PCs without darkvision must rely on some artificial means of light such as the light spell, a sunrod, or the everburning torch from Area 7.

The 4 pillars and central structure of this room are composed of tan stone and contain non-functional shower spigots about 8 feet off the ground.

**Creatures**: The insane small water elemental still dwells here, spending much of its time spinning in a tight vortex in Area 20. It notices the PCs the second one of them touches the water and swiftly moves to intercept them. 
**Tactics**: The elemental gets advantage to attacks while in the water, but disadvantage while out of the water. The elemental prefers to attack creatures carrying a light source trying to quash them and restore the darkness.


```statblock
name: Insane Small Water Elemental
size: Small
type: Elemental
alignment: Neutral
ac: 15
hp: 11 (2d8+2)
speed: 20 ft., swim 90 ft.
stats: [14,10,13,4,11,11]
saves:
  - Constitution: +4
  - Dexterity: +0
  - Wisdom: +0
senses: Darkvision 60 ft
actions:
  - name: Slam
    desc: Melee attack, +4 to hit, 1d6+3(B)
```


### Underwater rules:
PCs can hold their breath for a number of minutes equal to 1 + Con Mod (minimum 30 seconds). When a creature runs out of breath or is choking, it can survive for a number of rounds equal to its Constitution modifier (minimum of 1 round).

When making a **melee weapon attack**, a creature that doesn't have a swimming speed (either natural or granted by magic) has disadvantage on the attack roll unless the weapon is a dagger, javelin, shortsword, spear, or trident.

A **ranged weapon attack** automatically misses a target beyond the weapon's normal range. Even against a target within normal range, the attack roll has disadvantage unless the weapon is a crossbow, a net, or a weapon that is thrown like a javelin (including a spear, trident, or dart).

Creatures and objects that are fully immersed in water have resistance to fire damage.