
```
The western hall extends perhaps 40 feet, ending at a small marble platform raised about 6 inches off the floor. A strange, shattered arcane apparatus rests upon this platform, its curved ovular frame giving the appearance of a noble's dressing mirror. Only a third of this frame remains. An unusual arcane glyph about the size of a human's head has been delicately carved into the baseplate of the support platform. 
```

A **DC 10 Search** check turns up a few shards of an unidentifiable shiny black substance that feels like stone. It is slightly cold to the touch. Anyone inspecting the frame can make a **DC 13 Investigate** check to discover numerous runes and glyphs carved into a slot on the inside of the frame, where the "mirror's" glass would have been held. These can be identified as arcane symbols signifying transportation with a successful **DC 13 Arcana** check.

In ancient days, a grand ring of portals connected several Wind Duke burial cairns, but now only two such portals still function, the one in Area 3 and its partner in the undisturbed cairn of Icosiol, the slain Wandering Duke whose grand tomb served as the main stop along the circle of black glass gates. The base of the apparatus bears Icosiol's personal sigil, which has been all but forgotten by history. See the [[0.1 Wind Duke Glyphs|Glyphs of the Wind Dukes]] sidebar for more information on how the PCs learn more about the strange symbol.

**Treasure**: The shards of glass might fetch as much as 20 gp from the right buyer. In Diamond Lake, that means the gnome jeweler <span style="font-style:italic; font-weight: bold; color:rgb(112, 48, 160)">Tidwoad</span> or the magician <span style="font-style:italic; font-weight: bold; color:rgb(112, 48, 160)">Allustan</span>.

**Development**: If the PCs make too much noise in this area, they may be detected by the wolves in Area 4. Each of the three wolves has a -2 modifier on its Perception check due to distance. The DC for this check varies depending upon the PCs volume, ranging from 7 to 13.

Every 3 rounds, allow the PCs a **DC 16 Perception** check  to notice a faint flickering green light coming from the north (Area 7G)