
```
This small room contains 4 long benches and several niches along the walls.
```

**Treasure**: A pile of tattered clothes stuffed into one of the lockers hides a pouch containing 38 gp, 2 pp, and 55 sp. Ulavant's Seeker ring is worth 200 gp. It instantly identifies its wearer as a member of the seekers which may have implications with Khellek, the wizard in the trio of rival adventurers introduced in "Backdrop: Diamond Lake"

**Creatures**: This chamber is home to the scholar Ulavant, who became a ghoul after his death at the hands of the water elemental prevented him from accomplishing his goal of cataloguing the Whispering Cairn's secrets for the archive of the Free City's Seeker lodge. Ulavant wears a gold ring with the 8-pointed star Seeker insignia on the 3rd finger of his left hand. Note: the bump in EL accounts for the fact that the party is underwater, making the ghoul's paralysis effect much more powerful. It is not, however, as powerful as it might seem. Ulavan'ts paralysis attack freezes its victims in place, but paralyzed characters can continue to hold their breath for the duration of the paralysis. They do not begin to drown the moment the paralysis begins. The could, however, drown if they run out of breath before the paralysis ends. 

**Tactics**: Ulavant attempts to paralyze his enemies, starting with what he assumes to be bards, wizards, and sorcerers. Though his mind is now utterly consumed with the need to consume, Ulavant maintains some measure of his brilliance. He also retains a good measure of his original depravity. Should he paralyze all of his victims, he moves the frozen bodies so that they can look into each others eyes before gorging on one of the victims, starting with the throat. This theatrical flourish might just give one of the paralyzed PCs the chance they need to shake free from the paralysis.

```statblock
creature: Ghoul
```