
```
The central hallway opens into a large chamber with wings leading to the east and west. Across the chamber to the north wayns a 20 foot wide open arch draped from top to bottom in translucent cobwebs. An eerie green light flickers from beyond the webs, casting strange shadows about this room. The place smells of animal spoor and wet fur.

To the west, 3 short stairs lead to a widw marble dais, but the far end of the wing is obscured by darkness.

Huge slabs of cracked masonry and irregular piles of scattered debris choke the eastern wing, giving the appearance of complete collapse.

The sibilant, almost human whispers present in the passage becomes a chorus in this massive chamber, eerily echoing off the walls.
```

Anyone able to speak Auran gets the distinct impression that the whispers in this chamber are more than just a trick of wind and pipes. Occasionally, such folk can make out what must be words in the language of elemental air - words like "hopeless, sacrilege, enemies," and so on. The words come from specially prepared air tubes leading to the surface and are little more than a subtle way to discourage tomb robbery in a language few modern tomb robbers are likely to understand.

Thick cobwebs completely cover the arch leading to Area 7, blocking any view of that chamber beyond a flickering green light that seems to be a good distance to the north. Characters standing within 5 feet of the cobwebs can see through the mess enough to notice that a short flight of stairs descends from the arch, but more detail than that is impossible to make out. Dozens of tiny spiders dwell within these webs, but they are completely harmless. Slashing through the webs is a full-round action. A character can barrel his way through the mess, but in doing so he becomes completely covered by spider webs to the point at which he can no longer see. Clearing webs form the eyes of such a character requires a standard action.

Even a casual inspection reveals that the east wing is not as collapsed as it first appears. A 10 foot wide opening in the middle of the debris leads to the wolves' den in Area 5.

**Creatures**: The east wing of this large chamber houses a small pack of 3 hungry wolves that eagerly attack anyone who enters the room. 2 of the mangy curs look as if they haven't eaten in days. A third wolf is a little larger than the others and does not look hungry in the least. A straight line of scar tissue bisects its face from forehead to muzzle, a nasty battleaxe wound from years ago.

**Tactics**: The wolves prefer to gang up on the nearest opponent, using their trip ability to put an enemy on the ground as soon as possible. They then savage the prone opponent until it stops moving, at which point they move on to the next target. If presented with multiple targets, they tend to choose the smallest or weakest-looking foe.

```statblock
creature: Wolf
```
