
```
A wide stairway descends into an immense domed chamber. Seven short tunnels branch from the room in all directions, extending some 30 feet before ending in rounded walls. At the terminus of each passage, a thick chain dangles from an unseen high ceiling. Five of the chains bear colorful lanterns, but two hold nothing at all. Opposite the entry stairs, a bright green lantern containing what looks like a torch casts a weird, murky light about the room. Countless chips of glass and shiny metal inset into the chamber's domed ceiling reflect this light, giving the impression of startlight and falling snow. The dome starts about 10 feet off the ground and reaches an apex about 30 feet over the center of the room.

Below the dome's peak, a long dais holds what appears to be a marble sarcophagus. A milky white bas-relief figure, perhaps of a human, rests passively upon the sarcophagus lid. Unlike the rest of the tomb, this room is completely silent.
```

The sarcophagus in the center of the chamber might suggest that this is the final chamber in Zosiel's burial cairn. It is in fact a false tomb meant to discourage grave robbers, and contains a number of opportunities for such interlopers to meet an untimely end. Arcane elevators hidden in the ends of two branch passages lead to the quarters of the architect Nadroc and his team of servitors, who dwelled below for months while completing Zosiel's tomb. Because the chamber is quite complex, individual elements of the room are covered under their own headings below.

### The Sarcophagus

At the center of the chamber is a raised platform, upon which sits a sealed sarcophagus. The lid bears a white stone relief of a tall figure cloaked in a simple garment of flowing cloth. It's difficult to say why, exactly, but the outfit conjures thoughts of ancient times. The figure at first looks human, but a cursory examination reveals that it is about 7 feet tall, is completely hairless, and is of indeterminate sex. Its arms and hands rest at its side. The left hand curls upon itself in a fist, but the right is placed palm up, with the thumb turned in and all but the index finger held in parallel to the arm. The index finger, originally curled under the thumb (see [[WhisperingCairnSarcophagus.png|illustration]]), was broken off by tomb raiders centuries ago and now rests in the rubble in Area 5. The extended finger represents a clue to the location of the true tomb.

The figure wears a scarab-like amulet around its neck, inscribed with the personal symbol of Zosiel. Like Icosiol's personal glyph in Area 2, this symbol has been all but forgotten in the modern age. A **DC 19 Arcana** check reveals that it is a personal glyph of some powerful elemental entity. See the [[0.1 Wind Duke Glyphs|Wind Duke Glyphs]] section for additional information on how the PCs can learn more about the strange symbol.

The sarcophagus rests upon a small raised platform carved in the shape of a stylistic arrow, with the tip aligned with the head of the relief figured upon the lid and a short "shaft" extending from the foot of the sarcophagus. A **DC 16 Strength** check is sufficient to shift the sarcophagus platform one "click" clockwise, until it comes to rest pointed at the next short tunnel extending from the central chamber. See the tunnel descriptions for details on what happens when the arrow points at each tunnel. The sarcophagus platform cannot be moved counter-clockwise. When the PCs arrive, the arrow's tip points to the orange lantern. The sarcophagus bears a fiery arcane trap set to trigger when the lid is lifted off the stone coffin, and is completely empty.

**Sarcophagus Trap**: **Search DC 14**. **Disable DC 14**.
1st level Burning Hands. 3d6 fire damage in a 15 foot cone. **DC 13 Dex** for half.
*Maybe lower to 1d6 so as not to outright kill the party...



### The Tunnels

The ceiling of these tunnels is 10 feet off the ground, but the alcove ceilings at the ends of the tunnels extend 40 feet, just within the shadowy radiance of a torch. Unusually colored lanterns hang from long chains attached to the alcove ceiling, dangling about 5 feet from the floor. The indigo and red lanterns are missing. Each lantern is worth 50 gp.

The lanterns are an elaborate key mechanism. When torches have been placed inside all of the lanterns, the mouth of the howling face bas-relief in Area 8 opens, revealing passage to Zosiel's true tomb. When all seven lanterns have been lit, the glass and metal chips imbedded in the dome ceiling cast eerie reflections about the room, making it difficult to concentrate within the chamber. All attack rolls made by anyone within the room when all lanterns have been lit suffer a -2 penalty due to the distracting effect.

As noted above, two lanterns are nowhere to be seen. The indigo lantern rests in a backpack in Area 5, while the red lantern is submerged in Area 20 of the laborer' quarters.

A **DC 13 Search** check at the end of each tunnel is sufficient to turn up a 5-foot-diameter circle carved into the floor, directly below the hanging lantern (or where a hanging lantern would be in the case of the red and indigo tunnels). The circles form the tops of arcane elevators in the case of the yellow, green, and indigo tunnels, and are merely decorative in the case of all other tunnels.

### Red
The lantern that once hung from the chain at the end of this tunnel is nowhere to be seen. In fact it was taken by a member of Ulavant's Seeker investigation 60 years ago and still rests with the thief's corpse in Area 20.

### Orange
An orange lantern hangs at the end of this passage. The arrow platform at the center of the room points to this tunnel when the PCs arrive.

### Yellow
A yellow lantern hangs from the chain at the end of this tunnel. When the arrow platform at the center of the chamber points at this tunnel, a great rumbling from below the chamber can be heard as the circular stone at the end of the tunnel rises eight feet into the air, pushed up by a 5-foot-diameter metal cylinder that seems to arise from the ground itself. Seconds after it comes to a rest, two thin doors slide into the sides of the cylinder, revealing a small empty chamber.

This cylinder is an arcane elevator that leads to the personal quarters of Nadroc, the Wind Duke architect who constructed Zosiel's tomb. The cylinder fits only 1 medium creature at a time (two small, four tiny, etc). A large creature can cram itself into the cylinder, but can take no standard or full-round actions while stuffed within the cramped space.

When a PC enters the cylinder, the doors immediately slam closed, and the entire contracption lowers itself into the floor. The stone "cap" locks into place once it goes flush with the floor, but the rest of the apparatus continues downward for one full round, finally coming to rest in Area 9. The doors slide open quietly when the elevator comes to a stop. One round after the passenger exists the cylinder, the doors close and the contraption rises on a column of air to return to Area 7. If the arrow platform above is moved to point to another tunnel while the cylinder is at rest in Area 9, the elevator remains at the bottom of the shaft until the arrow once more points at the yellow tunnel. A button inset into the wall near the bottom of the shaft calls the elevator down at any time.

### Green
Several years ago, an explorer placed an everburning torch in the green lantern that hangs at the end of this tunnel, and it has remained here ever since. Like the yellow passage, this tunnel boasts an arcane elevator that descends to another sub-dungeon, in this case the lair of the eight Wind Duke laborers who helped Nadroc build Zosiel's tomb. Unlike the previous elevator, however, this one is jammed and is not likely to survive much experimentation. 

When the arrow platform points at this tunnel, a cacophonous creaking of stone against stone emerges from the ground below the green lantern. Anyone standing within the tunnel feels the ground rumble slightly, as if something is about to give way.

The elevator can handle  only 3 more rounds of this stress. On the third round of rumbling, the stone circle and the elevator apparatus beneath it completely give way, clattering to the ground of Area 15 60 feet below. The collapse occurs on the third round in which the arrow points at the tunnel. The three rounds need not be consecutive. Characters standing on this area when it collapses can make a **DC 14 Reflex** save to scramble onto solid ground.

One round after the elevator falls, the PCs may make a Perception check to hear the skittering of thousands of insects making their way up the shaft toward them. The DC for this check is **DC 10 Perception** for any PCs in the green lantern tunnel, and **DC 13 Perception** for PCs in the main chamber of Area 7.

Two rounds later, a living geyser of beetles bursts from the shaft. They make for the nearest PC, eagerly attempting to devour the character and move on to the next. The undulating blanket of beetles trails a thin coat of bright yellow acid in its wake.

Along with the beetles emerges a skittering mad slasher, a horrible aberration with six sharp legs sprouting from a central body that is little more than a disgusting eye. It attempts to avoid the beetle swarm (since sharing a space with the swarm at the end of its turn means taking damage) and maneuvers to position itself to make best use of its Whirlwind Attack feat.

The 60 foot shaft leading to Area 15 is pitted and scarred, which makes climbing down relatively easy (DC 10 Athletics).

[[Mad Slasher.png|Mad Slasher]]
[[Acid Beetle Swarm.png|Acid Beetle Swarm]]


```statblock
creature: Swarm of Beetles
name: Swarm of Acid Beetles
traits:
  - name: Acid Touch
    desc: A creature hit by an Acid Beetle's swarm attack takes 1d4 points of acid damage (DC 13 Constitution save for half)
  - name: Swarm
    desc: The swarm can occupy another creature's space and vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large enough for a Tiny insect. The swarm can't regain hit points or gain temporary hit points. 
```
```statblock
name: Mad Slasher
size: Medium
type: Aberration
alignment: Chaotic Evil
stats: [13,17,13,6,6,10]
senses: Darkvision 60
languages: Aklo (cannot speak)
speed: 40 ft
ac: 12
traits:
  - name: Whirlwind Attack
    desc: Melee attacks hit all creatures within 5 feet.
  - name: Distracting
    desc: A living creature that begins its turn with an acid beetle swarm in its space must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution save or be Poisoned for 1 round.
actions:
  - name: Claws
    desc: +3 1d4+1
hp: 4d4
cr: 1/2
```

### Blue
The ceiling over the blue lantern is 50 feet high, unlike the other lantern shafts, which top out at 40 feet. Anyone standing at the bottom of the shaft can make a **DC 16 Perception** check to notice that the shaft ceiling is not visible in the radius of normal torchlight, unlike the ceilings of the other lantern alcoves. 

At the top of the shaft, another passage leads to the northeast (Area 8). To reach the passage, the PCs must devise a way to climb 40 feet. The easiest way up is to climb the thick chain (**DC 16 Athletics** check).

A skeleton lies in a heap on the floor here. A **DC 15 Medicine** check or **DC 15 Nature** check reveals crushed bones, as if the unlucky fellow died from a great fall.


### Indigo
The chain at the end of this passage ends in a simple hook, as the indigo lantern was stolen years ago and eventually ended up in a backpack in Area 5. If the arrow platform points at this tunnel, a metal arcane elevator identical in appearance to that described in the yellow passage above rises from the floor under the dangling chain. Characters inspecting the apparatus can make a **DC 8 Perception** check to notice numerous crushed bones and moldy clothes upon the floor of the cylinder, an obvious clue that all is not as it should be with this arcane elevator. A careful **DC 13 Search** check turns up a pouch containing 35 gp, 15 sp, and a small ruby worth 50 gp.

Two rounds after a character stands within the cylinder the door closes and the contraption utterly crushes everything within it, sinking back into the ground until the arrow structure once more points at the indigo corridor.

**DC 16 Investigation** to locate the trap mechanism and **DC 14 Dexterity** check to disable it.

*If a PC happens to be caught by the trap, give them a Dexterity save to avoid being closed in. If caught, deal 3d6 damage, but they can "survive" for 10 rounds. At least long enough for the other PCs to try and rotate the statue back to the indigo passage to get the elevator back up.*

### Violet
A violet lantern hangs at the end of this passage.


### Ghosts in the Machine
Once each week, the minor wind spirits inhabiting the Whispering Cairn follow Nadroc's ancient instructions to reset certain elements of the tomb's design. At this time, the sarcophagus in Area 7 rotates counter-clockwise to once again point at the orange passage. The elevators in Areas 7Y and 7I rise and open, testing their lifting mechanism and doors in a routine that lasts a full minute. The elevator in Area 7G heaves and shudders at this time, but does not rise. The stress is enough to collapse the elevator, as outlined above. Theoretically, if the party has not yet explored the Lair of the Laborers before the passage of 3 weeks, this collapse might open a new part of the dungeon for the PCs.

The spirits also reset the *Burning Hands* trap on the sarcophagus. Once every year a powerful ancient sorcery replaces any of the colored lanterns that have been taken from the cairn, creating exact duplicates that hang from the correct chains. Unfortunately the poorly worded original incantation ensures replacements only for lanterns that have been taken from the cairn, meaning those lanterns that were taken from Area 7 but that remain elsewhere in the cairn are not replaced.

If the part is completely flummoxed by this room, a fortuitously timed "refresh" of Area 7 offers a blunt way to get the action moving.


