
### Lair of the Architect
It took the Wind Duke architect Nadroc nearly a year of solid work to design and construct the Whispering Cairn. During this period he dwelt within his work-in-progress, in a special series of chambers called the Lair of the Architect. due to the complexity of the elevator mechanism, this part of the cairn is not quite as looted as Areas 1-7., and contains a number of treasures from Nadroc's time. Ceilings in the Lair of the Architect reach a uniform height of 20 feet. Walls are made of solid stone.

[[LairOfTheArchitectPlayerMap.png|Player Map]]
[[LairOfTheArchitectDMMap.png|DM Map]]

```
The walls here are covered in bas-relief images similar to the slender figure upon the sarcophagus lid in the chamber above. Nearly a dozen androgynous, hairless humanoids stand in poses of deference, almost as if they are paying homage to the viewer. Many extend their hands in adoration, their faces awash in adulation. Several of the statues lack hands, arms, heads, or anything else easily hacked off by long-absent tomb robbers.

About 15 feet to the south, a dark passage extends from and elaborately carved arch. Only a little of this hallway is visible, however, as a large stone block obscures most of the passage.
```

The stone block is roughly 10 feet wide by 2 feet deep by 8 feet tall, and nearly seals off the passage to the south. A large niche about the same size as the block opens in the ceiling above. A fine layer of dust covers everything in the room. A character crawling upon the top of the block gains a decent view of the darkened hallway beyond, and is able to make out a handful of alcoves marking the walls of the tunnel at regular intervals. Squeezing between the tip of the arch and the top of the stone slab requires a **DC 21 Dexterity** check.

A button inset into the wall near the elevator shaft serves as a call button for the elevator. Pressing it recalls the elevator to this area.

**Trap**: The stone slab is far too heavy to lift, but up to four characters working together can topple it to the north with a successful **DC 21 Strength** check. The slab rests upon a pressure plate set to trigger when the weight of the slab is removed.

A noxious green gas fills the room from valves hidden within the mouths of the adoring bas-reliefs lining the rooms walls.

Investigate DC: 14
Disable DC: 15

**Poison**: The poison hangs in the air for 1d4 rounds. All creatures in the room make a **DC 15 Constitution** save. Creatures who fail have their Strength reduced by 1 point. When a character finishes a long rest, they recover 1 point of Strength damage.